.TH VEILA 1 "May 2026" "Veila 0.4.0" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
veila \- control CLI for the Veila Wayland screen locker
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B veila
.RI [ command ]
.RI [ options ]
.br
.B veilad
.RI [ options ]
.br
.B veila-curtain
.RI [ options ]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B Veila
is a native Wayland screen locker built around the secure
.B ext-session-lock-v1
protocol. The user-facing
.B veila
command talks to a running
.B veilad
daemon. It does not start the daemon by itself.
.PP
Start
.B veilad
from a user service or compositor startup command, then use
.B veila
to request locks, inspect state, validate configuration, view logs, and manage theme selection.
.PP
The
.B veila-curtain
binary owns the secure lock surfaces and is normally spawned by the daemon. Direct curtain launches are intended for preview and emergency testing.
For theme preview flags such as
.B --preview-png
and
.BR --preview-size ,
run
.BR "veila-curtain --help" .
.SH COMMANDS
.TP
.B lock
Ask the running daemon to lock the current logind session.
.TP
.B lock --wait-ready
Wait until the secure lock surface is active before returning.
.TP
.B status
Print daemon runtime status.
.TP
.B health
Print build and platform information.
.TP
.B doctor
Run read-only local diagnostics for the Wayland session, PAM service, daemon socket, user services, config, and session-lock protocol support.
.TP
.B check-config
Validate the active configuration and selected theme without starting the daemon or locking the session.
.TP
.B init [--theme NAME] [--force]
Create a starter configuration at the default config path, or replace an existing one when
.B --force
is supplied.
.TP
.B reload
Ask the running daemon to reload configuration from disk.
.TP
.B stop
Stop the running daemon.
.TP
.B idle [--lock-after=N] [--lock-before-sleep]
Run the compositor idle helper. If
.B --lock-after
is omitted, the default delay is 300 seconds.
.TP
.B logs
Show recent packaged systemd user service logs.
.TP
.B theme list
List bundled theme presets.
.TP
.B theme current
Print the active theme selection and resolved theme source.
.TP
.B theme print NAME
Print the raw source for a bundled or user theme.
.TP
.B theme set NAME
Set the top-level theme key in the active configuration and best-effort reload a running daemon.
.TP
.B theme unset
Remove the top-level theme key from the active configuration and best-effort reload a running daemon.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.B -h, --help
Show command help.
.TP
.B -v, --version
Print the local Veila version.
.TP
.BI --config= PATH
Use a specific configuration file for commands that read or mutate config.
.TP
.B --force-emergency-ui
Combine with
.B lock
to test the built-in emergency unlock prompt.
.TP
.B --latency-report[=verbose]
Combine with
.B lock --wait-ready
to print startup timing details.
.SH LOGS OPTIONS
.TP
.B --follow
Follow log output.
.TP
.B --file
Read the configured file log instead of the systemd user journal.
.TP
.BI --since= WHEN
Show logs since a journalctl-compatible time or a short duration such as
.B 10m
or
.BR 2h .
.TP
.BI --lines= N
Limit the number of log lines.
.TP
.B --daemon, --curtain, --ui, --idle, --all
Select which packaged service or process logs to show.
.SH DAEMON
.B veilad
starts the daemon when no control action is supplied. It also accepts legacy control flags such as
.B --lock-now,
.B --reload-config,
.B --status,
.B --health,
.B --doctor,
.B --check-config,
and
.BR --stop .
Prefer the
.B veila
subcommands for user-facing control.
.PP
Useful daemon-only options include:
.TP
.BI --config= PATH
Load a specific config file.
.TP
.BI --log-file= PATH
Append daemon logs to a file for this launch.
.TP
.BI --session-id= ID
Override the logind session id.
.SH CONFIGURATION
The default config file is
.BR $XDG_CONFIG_HOME/veila/config.toml ,
falling back to
.BR $HOME/.config/veila/config.toml .
.PP
If no config file exists, Veila uses the bundled default theme and hardcoded safety defaults. Run
.B veila init
to create a starter config explicitly.
.SH FILES
.TP
.I ~/.config/veila/config.toml
Default user configuration file.
.TP
.I ~/.config/veila/themes/
User theme directory.
.TP
.I /usr/share/veila/
Packaged assets, including bundled themes, fonts, icons, and systemd unit files.
.TP
.I /etc/pam.d/veila
PAM service used for password authentication.
.TP
.I /usr/lib/systemd/user/veilad.service
Packaged daemon user service.
.TP
.I /usr/lib/systemd/user/veila-idle.service
Packaged idle helper user service.
.SH ENVIRONMENT
.TP
.B VEILA_ASSET_DIR
Overrides the packaged asset directory.
.TP
.B VEILA_CURTAIN_BIN
Overrides the curtain binary path used by the daemon.
.TP
.B RUST_LOG
Controls tracing verbosity for development and troubleshooting.
.SH SECURITY NOTES
Veila uses secure Wayland session-lock surfaces. A compositor must advertise
.B ext_session_lock_manager_v1
for the real lock path to work. Regular fullscreen windows are not treated as a secure lock screen.
.PP
Unlock authority stays with the daemon and logind state. The UI forwards authentication attempts but does not self-authorize unlock.
.SH EXAMPLES
.TP
Start the daemon manually:
.B veilad
.TP
Lock and wait for readiness:
.B veila lock --wait-ready
.TP
Validate config:
.B veila check-config
.TP
Create a starter config:
.B veila init --theme default
.TP
Enable packaged user services:
.B systemctl --user enable --now veilad.service
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR systemctl (1),
.BR journalctl (1),
.BR pam (8)
